---
title: "Module 1.1: Skills, Capacities, and Management"  
layout: widepage
---

# {{ page.title }}

Each learning module will follow common patterns; the preamble will grow lighter as we get further in, because you grow accustomed to the pattern and work involved. 

{% alert info Helpful Hints %}
The first few modules will involve more "context setting," helping you understand the <i>why</i> and <i>wherefore</i> of what we are doing. Think of these blocks as the instructor whispering suggestions to help keep you on track.
{% endalert %}

* TOC
{:toc}

## Objective

Software projects are complex, creative projects that involve the orchestration of complex systems of hardware and software. The objective of this module is to lay foundations regarding the kinds of skills and capacities states should have for managing these projects. This will help you, as an SO, better support and evaluate the projects you are responsible for.

## Reflection: Managing Projects (20m)

{% alert info Writing to Think %}
Throughout the course, we will be reflecting on prior experiences, the things we read, and so on. A good way to slow down our overloaded brains is to <i>write</i>. Therefore, we will often take a moment to do some reflection as writing. For many reasons, we'd like to recommend you use a physical notebook. When you're writing, do your best to find a quiet place to work, free of distractions: silence the phone, turn off the social media... just unplug.
{% endalert %}

You've been managing projects in many contexts. Perhaps you tackle DIY projects, big or small, at home. Maybe you wrangle food for your household, doing shopping and food prep. At work, you're always wrangling some project or other, to say nothing of the work you do with states.

Make notes -- bullets, paragraphs, whatever works for you -- about all the moving pieces you need to keep track of when you're managing a project. Perhaps this looks different for different kinds of projects, so feel free to see how the list does (or does not) change if you consider 2-3 different projects you've worked on.

After you identify the things you keep track of, make a second list. This second list should be the habits and skills you need to succeed in managing projects. 

## Reading: Tech and Project Leads (30m)

When it comes to software projects, there are two roles you're likely to see in management positions: the <b>tech lead</b> and <b>product manager</b>, or <b>PM</b>. An important part of understanding project health is going to involve understanding these people, how they work with their teams, and how well they do that. To get started, lets start with a short video or two to set some context:

* [Day in the Life of a Product Manager](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R0ffUjavxxs)
* [The Role of being Technical in Technical Leadership](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=G25_RQqV4vE)

Then, for some depth, we'll do some reading.

* <a href="https://beingfa.com/2017/10/31/so-you-want-to-be-a-product-manager/">So You Want to Be A Product Manager</a>, by Julia Austin
* <a href="https://www.patkua.com/blog/the-definition-of-a-tech-lead/">The Definition of a Tech Lead</a>, by Pat Kua
* <a href="https://ajahne.github.io/blog/leadership/2018/02/16/what-is-a-tech-lead.html">What is a Tech Lead?</a>, by Ajahne

## Writing: Who Are the People In Your Neighborhood? (10m)

While this content is fresh, pick (at least) two people you work with on your projects who you think fit these roles. In your notebook, identify the qualities you observe in them and their work that you think exemplifies good (technical, product) management. Then, make note of the things that are sources of concern for you, given what you've read.

Jot down a few bullets for each. We're not diving deep here; the goal is to reflect some of the learning you've just done back into your own project work.

## Discussion: Team Function (1h)

With a colleague, find a time to have some conversation about your projects. For this conversation, roughly follow the script below. You might work your way through each set of questions, building up a shared understanding of each-other's projects.

1. How would you describe the "feeling" of communications you have with your teams?
   1. Stiff? Formal?
   2. Informal? Plain language?
2. Who do you talk with on your teams? 
   1. How many people on the teams do you know? 
   2. Do you get to talk with entire teams (state, vendor), or do you only get to talk to leadership?
3. What kind of relationship do you think the state and vendor teams have?
   1. With each-other?
   2. With the State CTO?
4. When you talk to people in technical leadership roles:
   1. Do they use plain language to describe their work?
   2. Do you think they are being honest, or trying to hide difficulty with complexity?
   3. Do they answer simple questions in simple ways?
5. When you talk to people in product management roles:
   1. Is everything always going well?
   2. Do they seem to value the people they work with?
   3. Do they seem to have a broad understanding (technical and user-centered) about the product?

By the end of an hour, you should have a shared understanding of each-other's projects. Most importantly, you want to compare and contrast the teams you have observed working on your projects, both on the state side and vendor side. 

Try and leave a few minutes to go back through, with your partner, and "flag" things as "red light," "yellow light," "green light." That is, given your knowledge so far, identify things you think are good ("green light"), things that might be cause for concern or to pay more attention to ("yellow light"), and those aspects of your teams that you think are going to be a space of focus and potential intervention in the future ("red light"). We'll come back to those "red light" concerns in future modules.

